# ADF Tutorial, Part 2: Creating The UI

The UI shall consist of a dialog for showing and finding employees based on: Jobs, Departments and free text search. 
The left pane should be an accordion with several tabs one for each type.
The center pane should be a filterable list which shall display a photo for each employee.
Finally a status pane on the right shall show contact details for selected employee.
The table shall have a toolbar to allow us to edit and create new users.

## 1.0 Creating the page.

Keyword   | Value
----------|------------------------------------------------------------------
Page type | Facelets
Page name | employees.jsf
Template  | Oracle Three column
Components| Accordion (three tabs: Departments, Jobs, Search)

### Instructions

* 1.1 Start by creating the base page for locating employees.
* 1.2 Next add the accordion to the left pane (start)
* 1.3 Add three panes to it the accordion

### Questions:

1. How can we add things to the various panes in the accordion?
   Name atleast three ways
2. Whats the difference between a jsf and a jsff page?
3. How can we customize the template (for instance add a logo)

## 2.0 Add a tree for departments.

In the accordion on the left we want to be able to select employees based on jobs and departments.

Keyword   | Value
----------|------------------------------------
Components| Tree / ADF Tree
View      | DepartmentsView
Fields    | DepartmentName, FirstName, LastName

### Instructions

* 2.1 Add a "ADF Tree" based on the DepartmentsView object.
* 2.2 Show DepartmentName and FirstName + LastName attributes in the tree.

### Questions:

* 2.1 What's the purpose of the DataBindings.xml which is created here?
* 2.2 What's the purpose of the EmployeesPageDef.xml file which is created when we do this?

### Hints
 
* 2.1 Data Controls are found in a separate tab in the Application view.
* 2.1 Drag the data source to where on the page you want it.
* 2.2 Dont forget to add a second node to the TreeBinding (+)

## 3.0 Add a "ADF Tree" based on the AllJobsView object.

In the accordion on the left we want to be able to select employees based on jobs and departments.

Keyword   | Value
----------|------------------------------------
Components| Tree / ADF Tree
View      | AllJobsView
Fields    | JobTitle, FirstName, LastName

### Instructions

* 3.1 Add a "ADF Tree" based on the AllJobsView object.
* 3.2 Show JobTitle and FirstName + LastName attributes in the tree.

### Hints

* 3.1 See Task 2 above.
 
### Questions:

* 3.1 How can we change the fields after we have added them?

## 4.0 Add employee table.

We need a table where we can select employees for editing and viewing.
This goes in the central pane.

Keyword   | Value
----------|------------------------------------------
Components| Table / ADF Table
View      | EmployeesView
Fields    | Gravatar, FirstName, LastName, Email
Selection | Single row
Filtered  | Checked
Sortable  | Checked
Read-only | Checked

### Instructions

* 4.1 Add employee table.
* 4.2 Show only Gravatar, FirstName, LastName and Email.
* 4.3 Make sure we can select only single rows in the table.
* 4.4 Also enable sorting and filtering as well as make it a read-only table.

### Questions:

* 4.1 What does the Filtered flag do?
* 4.2 Whats the impact of slecting multiple row selection (from a programmers context)?

## 5.0 Add a "ADF Form" based on the EmployeesView object.

On the right pane we want a quick preview of the selected employee.

Keyword   | Value
----------|------------------------------------------------------
Fields    | Gravatar, FirstName, LastName, + All contanct details
Selection | Single row
Read-only | Checked

### Instructions

* 5.1 Show only Gravatar, FirstName, LastName and Email.
* 5.2 Make sure we can select only single rows in the table.
* 5.3 Also enable sorting and filtering as well as make it a read-only table.

### Questions:

* 5.1 How can we make the gravatar into an image?
* 5.2 Is this really a form?

## 6.0 Add logic to make this dialog work as expected.

This involves syncronizing the various iterators as well as setting up ppr to work correctly.

### Instructions

* 6.1 Make sure all views behave as expected. 
* 6.2 Selecting a user in jobs/departments should select the employee in the table
* 6.2 When the list selection changes the form on the right should update to reflect this.

### Hints

* 6.1 Start by syncronizing the various "compatible views"
* 6.2 Edit the various trees and set the employee level "target data source" to point to the ${bindings.EmployeesViewIterator}
* 6.3 Make sure you setup the various employees objects (table/form) to listen to change events
* 6.4 Set the PartialTrigger option

### Questions

* 6.1 Why do we need to do this?
* 6.2 Why do we need to syncronize the iterators?
* 6.3 What is PPR and how does it work?
* 6.4 Why do we need to set PPR?
* 6.5 Why does the Job view not fill the screen?
* 6.6 Why does the table not scroll to the selected employee.

## 7.0 Add ability to edit employees.

Keyword     | Value
------------|------------------------------------------------------
Task Flow   | exmployees-definition.xml
Flags       | Bounded, NOT fragments
Transaction | Begin new
Outcomes    | save (for commit) and cancel (for rollback)
View name   | edit.jsf

Since this is an administrative application we want tohave the ability to edit the employees. To best resolve this we want to create a flow for managing users. Initialy (in this iteration) we will create a flow for editing users. Later we will add the ability to add/delete users. Please note that we will need transactions for this so we can rollback any changes if we click cancel.

### Instructions

* 7.1 Create a bounded task flow based on JSF pages.
* 7.2 In the task flow add the edit page and make sure we can commit the transaction at the end.
* 7.3 Add a rollback option.
* 7.4 Add transaction support

### Hints

* 7.1 When you create the bounded task flow make sure you unselect "with Page framgnets".
* 7.2 Actions can be dragged from the data control
* 7.4 Set the "Always begin new" transaction flag on the "Overview -> Behavior" tab

### Questions:

* 7.1 Is using commit/rollback operations a good or a bad idea?
* 7.2 What other options do we have?

## 8.0 Add edit button

Create routing between the two dialogs and add toolbar buttons to the employee table to allow editing the currently selected user.

Keyword   | Value
----------|------------------------------------------------------------------
Flow Cases| edit, return
Items     | employee.jsf, employee-definition.xml
Components| af:panelCollection, af:button

### Instructions

* 8.1 Update the controller with routing between the page and the task flow we created before
* 8.2 Add a toolbar to the table
* 8.3 Add an edit button to the toolbar
* 8.4 Set the action for the button to initiate the task flow

### Hints:

* 8.1 The controller for our application is an unbounded taskflow.
* 8.1 The unbounded taskflow is called adfc-config.xml
* 8.1 Add views and rounting to the unbounded taskflow
* 8.2 To add a tool bar surround the table with a PanelCollection pane as it has facets for toolbars.
* 8.2 One way to surround something is to right click the table and select "surround with".
* 8.3 The same strategy can be used to add the button but instead use insert inside the toolbar.
* 8.4 The action parameter is used to set the outcome of the button
* 8.4 With the routing corrrect we can "select" the action

### Questions:

* 8.1 What is a pane?
* 8.2 What is a facet?
* 8.3 Should we commit all the .adfc_diagram files?

## 9.0 Add edit employee form

Add a form which allows us to edit the current employee. The form should also have save/cancel buttons which connect to the task flow actions for the same. The view should use the same three pane template as before.
The content of the page should be a simple form and two buttons.

Keyword   | Value
----------|------------------------------------------------------------------
Name      | edit.jsf
Components| af:panelFormLayout, af:inputText, af:button
Save      | text: save, action: edit
Cancel    | text: cancel, action: cancel

### Instructions

* 9.1 Create the implementation for the "edit page" which we added to the task flow previously.
* 9.2 Add an editable ADF form based on the EmployeeView object.
* 9.3 Select only sensible fields for the form.
* 9.4 Add a save button to the form (which activates the save outcome).
* 9.5 Add a cancel button to the form (which activates the cacnel outcome).

### Hints:

* 9.1 Double click the view to create/edit it.
* 9.2 Drag dataobject as before.
* 9.3 Remove all transient fileds (gravtar, etc) as they cannot be edited.
* 9.4 You can add save buttons by clicking the "submit" option in the form dialog.
* 9.4 You need to change the button to call your actions instad of the default actions (which is rollbak/commit)
* 9.4 Outcomes are configured by the action parameter
* 9.5 You can clone edit the button to get a cancel button

### Questions:

* 9.1 What are sensible fields?
* 9.2 Why is it a bad idea to have navigation buttons in this form?
* 9.3 Is it a good idea to use the source view to edit pages?

## 10.0 Verify your view

You should now be able to execute the view and click edit/save/cancel.
Test this and make sure that the view works as expected.

### Instructions:

* 10.1 Run the view.
* 10.2 Fix all your bugs
* 10.3 Fix the cancel button
* 10.4 Fix the jobs view resizing issue
* 10.5 Fix "table selection" not showed issue
* 10.6 Fix the yellow "partialTriggers" warning.

### Question:

* 10.1 Is this simple?
* 10.2 How "real" is this use case?
* 10.3 What does "immidiate"?
* 10.4 Why do we need to change the partilTriggers property?
* 10.5 What is the meaning of :: in the ids?
* 10.6 Is partial triggers required?

## 11.0 Fixing the gravtar image.

Keyword      | Value
-------------|------------------------------------------------------
Components   | af:panelFormLayout, af:inputText, af:button
Small size   | 16px
Large Size   | 200px

The current page is not very pretty. For instance the gravatar is displayed as a "text string" the buttons have no icons, and so on and so forth.
To remedy this we can clean up the pages a bit.

### Instructions:

* 11.1 Change the gravatar field in the table on the employees page to display the photo.
* 11.1 Change the gravatar field in the form on the employees page to display the photo.
* 11.2 The image in the table is to large. Make it smaller
* 11.3 Image in form is to small, make it bigger
* 11.4 Add icons to the buttons

### Hints:

* 11.1 Use an image to display the image
* 11.1 Set the source to the el expression you used for output before.
* 11.2 Change properties to resize the image
* 11.4 Icons can be found at http://www.famfamfam.com/lab/icons/silk/

### Questions:

* 11.1 Why is the one called row.Gravatar and the other bindings.Gravatar.inputValue
* 11.1 Why is my solution to shrinking the image better than yours?

## 12.0 Change the task flow to support creating users.

We need the ability to create new employees as well as edit. To do this we need to change the task flow to "insert" a new user before we bring up the edit dialog.
We also need to add a "new" button as well as add a way to control the flow of our taskflow so we can either edit or create employees.

Keyword      | Value
-------------|------------------------------------------------------
Parameter:   | action
Component:   | Router, createOrEdit
Component:   | CreateInsert
Expression:  | #{pageFlowScope.action == 'edit'}
Expression:  | #{pageFlowScope.action == 'create'}

### Instructions:

* 12.1 Add a parameter (action) to the task flow. 
* 12.2 Then extend the flow with a routing component which routes based on the action to either "the old edit" flow.
* 12.3 Or a new createinsert method call.

### Hints:

* 12.1 Add an argument (action) to the task flow.
* 12.2 Add an inbound router which routes given the parameter
* 12.3 Route the create leg to a "create new"
* 12.4 The action parameter can be found in the #{pageFlowScope.action}
* 12.5 The createInsert new operation can be dragged from the data control (use the correct view object)
* 12.6 *DONT* forget to change the default activity to the router (I did).
* 12.7 If you get "activity not found" verify that ALL required attributes have been set (for instance default outcome on the router)

### Questions:

* 12.1 Why do we use the "strange" expression (and not: #{pageFlowScope.action} == 'edit'
* 12.1 Why do we need the router and the parameter? (why not two starts?)

## 13.0 Add a managed bean to store the variable between two views.

Keyword      | Value
-------------|------------------------------------------------------
Parameter:   | action, java.lang.String, required
Values:      | create / edit
Managed bean:| EmployeeHelper, action, request scope
Bean class:  | name.medin.tutorial.adf.intro.view.EmployeeHelper

Adding a managed bean to the adf-config and set the value of this bean as the input parameter for the task flow.

### Instructions:

* 13.1 Add a managed bean to the faces-config.xml
* 13.2 Add the SAME managed bean to the task flow (this will remove it from the faces-config)
* 13.3 Add a "parameter" to the bean called action
* 13.4 Configure the input parameters for the task flow to use the bean parameters

### Hints:

* 13.1 Adding a managed bean is done in the unbounded taskflow (adfc-config.xml)
* 13.2 Adding managed beans is a bit strange if you add them to the faces-config.xml file and then move them adfc-config.xml it works automagically) if not you have to create the class manually. (best option for the class is to check the git repo).
* 13.3 Add a single string parameter (action) and generate accessors.
* 13.4 Input parameters can be configure in the unbounded taskflow for the bounded task flow.
* 13.5 If you can not find the bean in the expression dialog you have not configured it

### Questions:

* 13.1 Why do we need a managed bean? (What other options do we have?)
* 13.2 Why do we use the request scope?
* 13.3 Whats the difference between adding the bean to the unbounded taskflow and the faces-config?

## 14.0 Add "new" button and connect them.

Keyword      | Value
-------------|------------------------------------------------------
Target:      | #{employeeHelper.action}
Value:       | create
Value:       | edit

Add the new button to employees.jsf and connect them two buttons to the bounded task flow.
Dont forget to change the value in our bean accordingly.

### Instructions:

* 14.1 Add the new button like before (same action)
* 14.2 Change the value of the bean with an action listsner
* 14.3 The Set property action listsner is suitable for this

### Questions:

* 14.1 Why dont we have to add "" around the create/edit values?
* 14.2 How can we se the value in "runtime" if we want to debug the flow?
* 14.3 What happens if we set the value to "foobar"?

## 99.0 Make the application awesome!

Things you can do:
* 99.1 Add a view criteria to the list to quickly allow showing only managers
* 99.2 Make the ability to filter the table based on the "folders" in the tree. I.e. selecting "hr" will only show people in the HR department.
* 99.3 Extend the database with a longer field for the email address


The coolest application and the coolest idea will win yet another price!
